---
published: false
title: "Finally graduated!"
date: "2020-05-27"
description: "Reflecting back on my time in Singapore Polytechnic and my plans for the future!"
---

Man, time sure flies. These past three years have been such a rollar-coaster. There were so many indesribable feelings
that I experienced when I had finally received my final results in March. It took me a while to sit down and write up a 
post sharing my reflections of the past three years.

I recently graduated from Singapore Polytechnic with a Diploma in Information Technology. I graduated with a GPA of 
4.00/4.00 and was awarded the IMDA Gold Medal for being the top in my cohort! First of all, that is a phenomenal
achievement that I had never imagined I would be able to achieve. I would not have been able to have achieved it if not
for the many supportive lecturers and peers that I had met along the way and not to mention my parents who - in spite 
of my crazy decision to study in polytechnic - supported me throughout these years and encouraged me to pursue my 
passions.

Without further ado, I would like to look back at the past three years and just talk about my experiences in school.

## Mini (personal) victories!

### Taking a leap of faith

Choosing poly instead of JC

### Polishing my craft

Refining my abilities as a developer

## Personal regrets

Now, you must be thinking to yourself, "Who is this guy going on and on about side projects and why should I listen to
what he says?" The reason why I have formed these opinions are because I - myself - have been on both sides of the 
coin. I have once been driven to work tirelessly to create a perfect portfolio only to be struck by burn out and lose 
motivation. I have also been in a position where I found myself really loving a side project only to be swept up by 
school work, only to return with a lack of motivation for the project that I had been so passionate about.

Before diving into my personal regrets, some background about where I come from is due. I was first exposed to 
programming when I was 14. However, for the next two years, I did not participate much in programming. I did start 
learning some fundamentals but school work had consumed so much of my time that I could not invest a lot of time into 
messing around with it. However, when it came time to decide between junior college and polytechnic, programming had
captured my attention (and heart) that I had decided to pursue this passion in Singapore Polytechnic - doing a Diploma
in Information Technology. The next three years in Singapore Polytechnic was where I was able to immerse myself into
this culture of programming and find like-not minded individuals to interact with. However, it is also this period of 
time where my personal regrets spawned from.

When I started school, I had promised myself that I would dedicate my time to programming and by extension, chase this
dream of becoming the next Linus. And it's hard to deny that choosing this path had enriched my life and knowledge in
more ways than one. Being exposed to so much programming also gave me the opportunity look at problems through a unique
lense. I was able to work with startups that built software for the health industry like MightyAim - where I built 
software for the visually impaired - and XCLR8 - where I worked with my final year project team to build software to 
help therapists manage their patients for physiotherapy. I got to meet so many bright and unique individuals online and
offline, locally and interantionally. What I had learnt during my own projects helped me in school and vice versa. It
was a fun experience.

However, in retrospect, I have come to realise how short-sighted I had been the last three years. Was I happy with my
progress? Definitely. Did I do well in school? Absolutely. I had learnt so much about myself and the industry that it 
has proven indispensable when helping my peers. Yet, looking back now, I have realised that I had missed out on so many 
opportunities for growth that wasn't centered around myself. I realise now that I was so focused on this fantasy of 
side projects that I had neglected the most important aspect of school - personal development. Not just within your 
domain but as an individual of society. There were times that I was burnt out - where I could not muster the strength 
to write a single line of code because I had worked so much.

While I do not regret my decision, I acknowledge that not choosing to explore beyond my domain has made my school 
experience less interesting. I would have definitely found it more eventful had I attended a few more workshops or 
joined a club.

## Moving forward

So what happens now? Where has my personal sharing led me to? Well, I believe it has taught me to cherish my time in 
school and the people there. Yes, work is incredibly important, but so is contributing back to society. I have 
graduated from Singapore Polytechnic and yet I know I could have done more during my time there. 

I have university left and this time, I will not be squandering this opportunity. I will - finally - step out of my
bubble and expand my horizons.

