---
published: false
title: "A letter to anxious me"
date: "2020-06-26"
---

Dear Jia Hao,

I am writing to you right before several life changing events are about to happen to you; you will be starting an 
internship soon and right after, you will be enlisting and serving your nation. Your everyday comforts will become a 
rarity. You will be pushed beyond your limits. You will realise how much you have been taking your life for granted.

However, I am proud of you. These are words that you never tell yourself. Sometimes, I really wonder how much you 
congratulate yourself on the little things. So I would like to start by saying that I am so proud of you and how much 
you have grown.

I am so proud of you for growing out of your shell. You were the awkward young boy who never fit in. You were the meek 
little boy who could not even muster a sentence without feeling like retreating back into your shell. You were the shy 
child who would stammer on every word. It is hard to imagine that you are now an outspoken young man. Rather than 
allowing yourself to be crushed by your anxiety, you stood firm and found your place in this world. You have found your
own rhythm and have created a life out of it. You have found your voice and have started to create ripples in the lives
of others by sharing your story and passions with others.

I am so proud of you for taking those leaps of faith. You were willing to join a polytechnic despite others pushing for
you to attend junior college. You were willing to pick IT despite others telling you to pursue a traditional path for 
education. You were willing to put yourself on the line to share your story. You were willing to apply for the PSC 
scholarship even though you thought you could never have even made it past the first stage. You were willing to admit 
to your mistakes and grow. Even now, you are continually putting yourself on the line, pushing yourself out of your 
comfort zone.

Finally, I am so proud of you for doing well. I think you often short change your own achievements. You have never 
viewed your achievements as impressive because you have always compared yourself to others. You have always been so 
quick to criticise everything you did. You have always belittled any progress made because you never believed it was 
good enough. Yet, you fail to realise how much you have achieved. You went from the student who was at the bottom of 
his class to being at the top. You went from someone who despised learning to someone who cannot stand being stagnant. 
You have improved and you are continuing to do so. So why are you minimising all your efforts? Be proud of what you 
have achieved and look forward to what more you can achieve.

2020 has been a crazy year. Graduations were cancelled. COVID-19 is causing a global economic crisis. Riots are 
happening in the US. SAT venues are fully book. It is almost like Murphy's Law upgraded and decided that instead of 
ruining a day, it would like to ruin a year.
